.Dd June 15, 2020
.Dt DISCO-SEARCH 1
.Os DiscoDOS
.Sh NAME
disco-search \- search, edit and update DiscoDOS releases and tracks
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm disco
.Ar search
.Op Fl -help
.Op Fl -mix | Fl -discogs-update | Fl -brainz-update | Fl -edit
.Op Fl -track
.Op Fl -pos
.Op Fl -resume
.Ar search_terms
.Sh DESCRIPTION
the
.Cm search
command
searches for releases and tracks in the Discogs
collection. Several actions can be executed on the
found items, eg. adding to a mix, updating track info
from Discogs or fetching additional information from
MusicBrainz/AcousticBrainz or simply adding track information by
hand (user-defined BPM/key, track notes, user-defined
AcousticBrainz recording ID).
.Sh ARGUMENTS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ar search_terms
The collection is searched for these terms. When
offline, it searches through all releases'
artists/titles only (eg tracknames not considered).
When online, the Discogs API search engine is used and
also tracknames, artists, labels and catalog numbers
are looked through. If your search term consists of
multiple words, put them inside double quotes (eg.
"foo bar term"). If you instead put a number as your
search term, it is assumed you want to view exactly
the Discogs release with the given ID. If search term
is the special keyword "all", a list of all releases
in the DiscoBASE is shown (including weblinks to
Discogs/MusicBrainz release pages). In combination
with
.Fl u,
.Fl z
or
.Fl zz
respectively, all tracks are
updated. Note that this is exactely the same as
" disco import " in combination with those options.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , Fl -help
show this help message and exit
.It Fl m Ar MIX_NAME , Fl -mix Ar MIX_NAME
adds a track of the found release to the given mix ID (asks which track to add in case
.Fl t
is missing).
.It Fl u , Fl -discogs-update
updates found release/track with Discogs track/artist details (asks which track to update in case
.Fl t
is missing).
.It Fl z , Fl -brainz-update
updates found release/track with additional info from MusicBrainz and AcousticBrainz. (asks which track to update in case
.Fl t
is missing)
.Fl z
quick match,
.Fl zz
detailed match (takes longer, but more results).
.It Fl e , Fl -edit
edits/adds details to a found release/track. Editable fields: key, BPM, key notes, general track notes, custom MusicBrainz recording ID. (asks which track to edit in case
.Fl t
is missing).
.It Fl t Ar TRACK_NUMBER , Fl -track Ar TRACK_NUMBER
in combination with
.Fl m
this option adds the given track number (eg. A1, AA, B2, ...) to the mix selected using .Fl m
; in combination with
.Fl z
or
.Fl u
the given track is the one being updated with *Brainz or Discogs details; in combination with
.Fl e
the given track is to one to be edited.
.It Fl p Ar POS_IN_MIX , Fl -pos Ar POS_IN_MIX
in combination with
.Fl m
this option states that we'd like to insert the track at the given position (eg. 1, 14, ...), rather than at the end of the mix; in combination with
.Fl z,
.Fl zz,
.Fl u
or
.Fl e
this option is ignored.
.It Fl -resume Ar OFFSET
resumes long-running processes at the given offset position (expects a number). You can combine this option currently with *Brainz matching operations only (
.Fl z,
.Fl zz
)
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
Step by step tutorials and in-detail explanations of all DiscoDOS commands can be found on the README and User's Manual pages:
.Lk https://github.com/JOJ0/discodos/blob/master/README.md
.Lk https://github.com/JOJ0/discodos/blob/master/MANUAL.md
.Sh AUTHORS
J0J0 T <jt@peek-a-boo.at>
.Pp
Special thanks go to Samplissimo for testing and feature ideas, to Schobernoise for motivation and a GUI draft and most of all to Gold Fisch for her patience while Doogie Howser wrote in his diary!
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr disco-import 1 , 
.Xr disco-suggest 1 , 
.Xr disco-mix 1 , 
.Xr disco 1
.Xr discosync 1
