.Dd June 15, 2020
.Dt DISCO-MIX 1
.Os DiscoDOS
.Sh NAME
disco-mix \- manage your DiscoDOS mixes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm disco
.Ar mix
.Op Fl -help
.Op Fl -verbose
.Op Fl -create-mix | Fl -delete-mix | Fl -edit | Fl -edit-mix | Fl -bulk-edit | \
Fl -add-to-mix | Fl -reorder-tracks | Fl -delete-track | Fl -copy | \
Fl -discogs-update | Fl -brainz-update
.Op Fl -pos
.Op Fl -resume
.Op Ar mix_name
.Sh DESCRIPTION
the
.Cm mix
command is used to manage your DiscoDOS mixes. A mix is basically just a list of tracks in a specific order, a playlist, a track pool, you name it.
.Sh ARGUMENTS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Op Ar mix_name
mix name or mix ID being displayed, edited, created,
copied, deleted, etc. If mix_name is left out, a list
of available mixes is shown and all other arguments
are ignored.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , Fl -help
show this help message and exit
.It Fl v , Fl -verbose, -vv
increases mix tracklist view detail.
.Fl v
adds tracknames, artists, transition rating/notes and general track notes.
.Fl vv
shows when and how MusicBrainz matching was done and also direct weblinks to Discogs releases, MusicBrainz releases/recordings and AccousticBrainz recordings.
.It Fl c , Fl -create-mix
creates new mix (named as given in mix_name argument).
.It Fl D , Fl -delete-mix
deletes the mix (given in mix_name) and all its contained tracks!
.It Fl e Ar POSITION , Fl -edit Ar POSITION
edits/adds details of a track in a mix (editable fields: key, BPM, track number, position in mix, key notes, transition rating, transition notes, general track notes, custom MusicBrainz recording ID).
.It Fl E , Fl -edit-mix
edits/adds general info about a mix (name, played date, venue).
.It Fl b Ar FIELDS , Fl -bulk-edit Ar FIELDS
bulk-edits specific fields of each track in mix. Syntax of
.Ar FIELDS
argument: <field1>,<field2>,... available fields: key,bpm,track_no,track_pos,key_notes,trans_rating, trans_notes,notes,m_rec_id_override.
.It Fl a Ar SEARCH_TERMS , Fl -add-to-mix Ar SEARCH_TERMS
searches for release/track in collection and adds it to the mix, This option is actually a shortcut to "disco search -m mix_name search_term" and behaves identically. If
.Ar SEARCH_TERMS
is a number, it is assumed being a Discogs release ID. A quick database check is done and if non-existent yet, the release is 1) added to the Discogs collection and 2) imported to DiscoBASE. This is a convenience function eg when trying to quickly add a release to the mix that's not in the DiscoBASE yet (possibly an only recently gained record?).
.It Fl r Ar POSITION , Fl -reorder-tracks Ar POSITION
reorders tracks in current mix, starting at
.Ar POSITION
; Note that this is a troubleshooting function and usually shouldn't
be necessary to use.
.It Fl d Ar POSITION , Fl -delete-track Ar POSITION
removes the track at the given position from the mix.
.It Fl -copy
copies the mix given in mix_name argument. Asks for new name!
.It Fl u , Fl -discogs-update
updates tracks in current mix with additional info from Discogs. Can be combined with
.Fl p
when mix ID provided or with
.Fl -resume
when mix ID not provided (all tracks in mixes update).
.It Fl z , Fl -brainz-update, Fl -zz
updates tracks in current mix with additional info from MusicBrainz and AcousticBrainz. Leave out mix ID to update every track contained in any mix.
.Fl z
quick match, 
.Fl zz
detailed match (takes longer, but more results). Can be combined with
.Fl p
when mix ID provided or with
.Fl -resume
when mix ID not provided (all tracks in mixes *Brainz matching).
.It Fl p Ar POSITION , Fl -pos Ar POSITION
in combination with
.Fl a
this option adds the found release/track at the given position in the mix (rather than at the end). In combination with
.Fl u,
.Fl z
or
.Fl zz
the update process is started at the given position in the mix.
.It Fl -resume Ar OFFSET
resumes long-running processes at the given offset position (expects a number). You can combine this option currently with "all tracks in mixes Discogs update" (disco mix
.Fl u
) or with "all tracks in mixes *Brainz matching" (disco mix 
.Fl z,
disco mix 
.Fl zz
).
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
Step by step tutorials and in-detail explanations of all DiscoDOS commands can be found on the README and User's Manual pages:
.Lk https://github.com/JOJ0/discodos/blob/master/README.md
.Lk https://github.com/JOJ0/discodos/blob/master/MANUAL.md
.Sh AUTHORS
J0J0 T <jt@peek-a-boo.at>
.Pp
Special thanks go to Samplissimo for testing and feature ideas, to Schobernoise for motivation and a GUI draft and most of all to Gold Fisch for her patience while Doogie Howser wrote in his diary!
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr disco-search 1 , 
.Xr disco-import 1 , 
.Xr disco-suggest 1 , 
.Xr disco 1
.Xr discosync 1 , 
