.Dd June 15, 2020
.Dt DISCO-IMPORT 1
.Os DiscoDOS
.Sh NAME
disco-import \- import and update DiscoDOS releases and tracks
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm disco
.Ar import
.Op Fl -help
.Op Fl -add-to-collection | Fl -tracks | Fl -brainz
.Op Fl -resume
.Op Ar RELEASE_ID
.Sh DESCRIPTION
the
.Cm import
command imports your whole Discogs collection or just single releases and tracks. It is also used to get extended track information from Discogs, MusicBrainz and AcousticBrainz (BPM, musical key, links to MusicBrainz releases and recordings, links to AcousticBrainz recordings).
.Sh ARGUMENTS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Op Ar RELEASE_ID
the Discogs release ID you want to import to
DiscoBASE. If left empty, the whole collection will be
imported. If the additional option
.El
.Fl a
is used, the
release will be added to your Discogs collection _and_
imported to DiscoBASE. Note that a regular import of a
given release ID is quite time consuming: We have to
check wether or not this release ID is already in the
Discogs collection (we don't want duplicates), thus we
have to run through all of your releases via the
Discogs API. Unfortunately Discogs does not allow us
to search for release IDs in our collection, we only
can "iterate" through them. Therefore the recommended
way of adding newly gained releases is by using the 
.Fl a
option.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , Fl -help
show this help message and exit
.It Fl a , Fl -add-to-collection
This is the recommended (and fastest) way of adding newly gained releases to your collection. The given release ID is added to your Discogs collection (same as when you click an "Add to collection" in the Discogs Webinterface. Additionally the release is added to the DiscoBASE. Note that for performance's sake, we don't do a time-consuming check if the release is already in your Discogs collection by asking the Discogs API, but only do a quick check if the ID is in the local DiscoBASE already.
.It Fl u , Fl -tracks
extends the Discogs import (releases and also tracks will be downloaded) - takes siginficantly longer than the regular import. Note: This is the same as " disco search all
.Fl u
".
.It Fl z , Fl -brainz
imports additional information from MusicBrainz/AcousticBrainz. This action takes a long time.
.Fl z
quick match,
.Fl zz
detailed match (takes even longer, but more results). Notes: This is the same as " disco search all
.Fl z
". Prior to using this option, an extended Discogs import is recommended (disco import
.Fl -tracks
). Otherwise only tracks that were already downloaded to the DiscoBASE (eg used in mixes and updated using " disco mix
.Fl u
") will be updated.
.It Fl -resume Ar OFFSET
resumes long-running processes at the given offset position (expects a number). You can combine this option currently with the *Brainz matching import operation only (
.Fl z
,
.Fl zz
)
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
Step by step tutorials and in-detail explanations of all DiscoDOS commands can be found on the README and User's Manual pages:
.Lk https://github.com/JOJ0/discodos/blob/master/README.md
.Lk https://github.com/JOJ0/discodos/blob/master/MANUAL.md
.Sh AUTHORS
J0J0 T <jt@peek-a-boo.at>
.Pp
Special thanks go to Samplissimo for testing and feature ideas, to Schobernoise for motivation and a GUI draft and most of all to Gold Fisch for her patience while Doogie Howser wrote in his diary!
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr disco-search 1 , 
.Xr disco-suggest 1 , 
.Xr disco-mix 1 , 
.Xr disco 1
.Xr discosync 1 , 
