---
layout: post
title: Schmiede19 MIDILAB
comments: true
published: 2019-09-16
#image: /images/2019-9-13-midilab/midilab_title_1.jpg
image: /images/2019-9-13-midilab/pro_micro_pins_color.png
draft: false
---

This post developed during the DIY MIDI controller workshop at Schmiede 2019 in Hallein (Austria). It was used as a presentation and documentation tool.

<a name="midi"></a>
## What can we do with MIDI?

* Play notes
* Change parameters 
* Change programs/presets
* ...

## What is MIDI?

* a serial communication protocol
* bitrate of 31250 bps (bits per second), also called "baud rate"
* each message consists of 2 or 3 bytes

### MIDI messages


```
| Value (dec) | Value (Hex) | Command          | Data bytes                |
| ------------| ----------- | ---------------  | ------------------------- |
| 128-143     | 80-8F       | Note off         | 2 (note, velocity)        |
| 144-159     | 90-9F       | Note on          | 2 (note, velocity)        |
| 160-175     | A0-AF       | Key Pressure     | 2 (note, key pressure)    |
| 176-191     | B0-BF       | Control Change   | 2 (controller no., value) |
| 192-207     | C0-CF       | Program Change   | 1 (program no.)           |
| 208-223     | D0-DF       | Channel Pressure | 1 (pressure)              |
| 224-239     | E0-EF       | Pitch Bend       |                           |
| ------------| ----------- | ---------------- | --------------------------|
```

16 MIDI channels

Note byte 1 (channel):
* Channel 1: 144
* Channel 2: 145
* Channel 16: 159

Note byte 2 (note number):
```
C0  = 0
C1  = 24
C#1 = 25
C4  = 60
A4  = 60
C5  = 72
```

[MIDI note numbers list](https://glassarmonica.com/science/frequency_midi.php)

[another MIDI note numbers list](https://newt.phys.unsw.edu.au/jw/notes.html)

CC message:
* Channel 1: 176
* Channel 2: 177
* Channel 16: 191


#### Examples

Send a NoteOn message for the note of D#3 on channel 1 with a velocity of 90:

```
144 | 36 | 90
```

Send a Control Change message for Controller number 81 on channel 2 with a value of 65
```
177 | 81 | 65
```

<br />
Can we choose any CC number for our controller?

[midi cc list](http://nickfever.com/music/midi-cc-list)


<a name="hardware"></a>
## Getting to know the hardware

[official Arduino specs comparision table](https://www.arduino.cc/en/products.compare)

### Nano pinout

<div class="clearfix">
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/nano_pins_color.jpg' alt_text='' caption='' width="100%" float="left" %}
</div>
<br>

### Pro Micro pinout

<div class="clearfix">
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/pro_micro_pins_color.png' alt_text='' caption='' width="100%" float="left" %}
</div>

### Nano specifics

The Nano is very similar to the well-known Arduino Uno, it only is smaller and has more connection possibilities.

#### Chinese Nano clones (CH340)

The Arduino Nano clones we use, have a CH340 chip that does the USB to serial conversion. To program it we need a USB-driver specific to our computers operating system.

[For Mac OS X High Sierra and above we need this driver](https://blog.sengotta.net/signed-mac-os-driver-for-winchiphead-ch340-serial-bridge/)

[For Windows 10 we need this one](https://sparks.gogo.co.nz/ch340.html)


##### Programming settings

Golden USB socket version:
* Board: _Arduino Nano_
* Processor: _ATmega328b_

Silver USB socket version:
* Board: _Arduino Nano_
* Processor: _ATmega328b (old bootloader)_

Both types:
* Select the correct serial port
   * Mac OS X: something called /dev/cu.something (eg. /dev/cu.wchusbserial1410)
   * Windows: COMx (eg COM4, COM10, ...)
       * use the _Devicemanager_ to find out which COM port appears when you connect the Arduino to the USB port

If our programming settings or the CH340 driver are wrong this is one of the possible errors:

```avrdude: stk500_getsync(): not in sync: resp=0x00```


### Pro Micro specifics

[Sparkfun Pro Micro hookup guide](https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/pro-micro--fio-v3-hookup-guide/hardware-overview-pro-micro)

[nice Pro Micro connections video-tutorial, also about multiplexing input](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y0v2clCVw9k)

#### Chinese Pro Micro clones

Specifically this chip: ATmega32U4 5V 16MHz

##### Programming settings
* Board: _Arduino Leonardo_
* Select the correct serial port
   * Mac OS X: something called /dev/cu.something
   * Windows: COMx (eg COM4, COM10, ...)
       * use the _Devicemanager_ to find out which COM port appears when you connect the Arduino to the USB port


## Wiring power connections and a button

To power the plus- and minus-rails of our breadboard we connect the <em>5V</em> and <em>GND</em> pins to it. On the <em>Pro Micro</em> the <em>5V</em> pin is called <em>VCC</em>.

<div class="clearfix">
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/vcc_ground_switch.jpg' alt_text='' caption='The position of the switch and its wiring on the breadboard is <strong>wrong in this pic</strong> and can damage the Arduino! Refer to the pics in chapter <a href="#wiring_midi">Wiring the MIDI socket</a> for the correct position and wiring of the switch.' width="100%" float="left" %}



</div>

### So why is position and wiring of the switch wrong?

The short answer is: Because we assumed that these switches work similar to a lot of other switch types.

The square-button-switches we use are so called DPDT switches (Dual Pole Double Throw). This basically means that we can use them to _switch on/off_ or _toggle_ two things with one buttonpress. Or put differently: Two switches in one.


<div class="clearfix">
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/dpdt_toggle_switch_diagram.png' alt_text='' caption='This is how a regular DPDT switch works. Pins 1, 3, 5 represent one toggle switch and pins 2, 4, 6 the other one. If we would plug in one of <em>those</em> into the breadboard as shown on the photograph above we would be perfectly fine: Even though we connected some pins together via the vertical rows of the breadboard (pin-pairs 1+2, 3+4 and 5+6 would connect), everything would be working as it should: Our goal is to connect <strong>one</strong> Arduino pin (D2) to either 5V or GND (high or low). We actually don&#39;t care that we can&#39;t use the second switch in our DPDT anymore.' width="59%" float="left" %}

  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/dpdt_push_switch_diagram.png' alt_text='' caption='The switches <em>we</em> use are also DPDT switches that certainly can also be used to toggle two things at a time, only that their two (vertical) pin rows don&#39;t operate <em>in parallel</em> - their pinout is completely different.
' width="39%" float="right" %}
</div>
<br/>

Let&#39;s assume the same pin numbering as on the regular DPDT diagram on the left, for our oddly wired switches on the right: In off-state 1+5 and 2+6 connect. In on-state it&#39;s 1+3 and 4+6.

So what actually happens when we plug in the power to the breadboard (connect the Arduino to a USB port) and keep the button unpressed, is: We connect + and - poles together (via pins 1 and 5) and thus short-circuit the Arduino which it can withstand for a short time only.

To correctly wire these types of switches we need to:
* plug them into the middle of the breadboard so the two _3-pin-rows_ aka the _2 switches_ are isolated from each other.
* use pin 5 (bottom-right / blue wire on pic below) to connect to the Arduinos input (D2).
* in unpressed state pin 1 (bottom-left / green wire) and pin 5 are connected and thus D2 is connected to GND
* in pressed state pin 1 (middle / purple wire) and pin 3 are connected and thus D2 is connected to 5V.


<a name="wiring_midi"></a>
## Wiring the MIDI socket

<div class="clearfix">
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/schematic_midi_output.png' alt_text='' caption='This schematic shows the socket from the backside (the soldering side)' width="49%" float="left" %}
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/midi_din_case.jpg' alt_text='' caption='The socket is held as on the schematic. We are looking at the soldering side. The socket&#39;s TX pin is the orange wire on the top-left.' width="49%" float="right" %}
</div>
<br>

<div class="clearfix">
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/midi_din_breadboard.jpg' alt_text='' caption='Be aware of that the circuit-/breadboard socket is flipped upside-down compared to the wiring schematic above! The TX pin is the violet wire on the (bottom-)right.' width="49%" float="left" %}
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/midi_din_breadboard_pins.png' alt_text='' caption='A circuitboard/breadboard socket seen from the front. The TX pin (5) would be bottom-left now' width="49%" float="right" %}
</div>
<br>

For more detailed schematics and information on MIDI Output and MIDI input wiring refer to the official [MIDI specification of the MIDI manufacturers association](https://www.midi.org/specifications-old/item/midi-din-electrical-specification)



<a name="wiring_midi"></a>
## Wiring a potentiometer

<div class="clearfix">
  {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2019-9-13-midilab/pot.jpg' alt_text='' caption='The output of a pot usually is the middle pin (but as we learned earlier never trust on this! ;-)). It&#34;s connected to the Arduinos analog input pin A0. The left pin (purple) we connect to ground and the right pin (green) to 5V.' width="100%" float="right" %}
</div>

<br/>
When we twist the knob to the left we decrease the resistance between ground (purple wire) and the pots output (yellow wire) until it is 0 Ohms. When twisted to the right the resistance between the two wires increases until it reaches almost the nominal value of the pot (10kOhms). The actual Ohms are not of interest when using pots with Arduinos. When we read out the current value of an analog input we always receive a number between 0 and 1023

There is a second yellow wire that is supposed to be connected to a second pot but for now we put it on ground so the Arduinos input A1 does not deliver measuring values and disturb us while coding and/or debugging.


## Coding

[The code we produce is available on this github repo](https://github.com/JOJ0/midilab)

Direct links to "git commits":

[final code day 1 - reading in a button's state](https://github.com/JOJ0/midilab/blob/4373c414d803a348d799914d412ad94fbd72badb/midilab.ino)

[final code day 2 - sending out midi CC on and off](https://github.com/JOJ0/midilab/blob/a14eb79253ec428675e477e2c885c6f3f10fb892/midilab.ino)

[day 3 - four switches for-loop example](https://github.com/JOJ0/midilab/blob/2341d159cfd79cf7d36ab147d809c944b6615084/midilab.ino)

[day 3 - two pots for-loop example](https://github.com/JOJ0/midilab/blob/601bf655e5893350eff4a27f8f06143a91a295ae/midilab.ino)
<br/><br/>

#### Thanks a lot to all the particpants! You really were lovely and it was a pleasure to teach you!
<br/>



{% comment %}
# Template stuff (ignore)

3 pics in a row template here:

<div class="pic_row_3">
  <div class="pic_left">
    {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2018-11-17-midictrl1/' caption='' %}
  </div>
  <div class="pic_middle">
    {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2018-11-17-midictrl1/' caption='' %}
  </div>
  <div class="pic_right">
    {% include thumb.html filename='/images/2018-11-17-midictrl1/' caption='' %}
  </div>
</div>

youtube video here:

{% include youtube.html id="xxxxxx" width="100%" %}
text under youtube video
<br><br>


[link 1](https://www.musikding.de/20-Pin-inline-socket)<br>
[link 2](https://www.musikding.de/10-Pin-strip)<br>

pic description on the right of pic
  <div style="width: 49%; float: right;">
  </div>

{% endcomment %}